For the final application of network coding we examine in this paper, let us consider wireless sensor networks, in which very small sensors can be spread onto surfaces, and can harvest energy from the environment, to form sensing surfaces over a built-in communication network [Rout13]. Sensor nodes are generally equipped with a radio transceiver, a microcontroller, a memory unit, and a set of transducers with which they can acquire and process data. To reduce each node’s size and energy requirements, the transceiver’s oscillator is replaced by an on-chip resonant circuit. However, the center frequency of the resonant circuit is random, which means that each node picks a random channel on which to transmit, and another random channel on which to receive. The nodes can self organize themselves to form a multi-hop network and transmit the data to a sink node [Rout13]. The throughput between any two nodes is constant if only routing is used, but grows linearly in the number of channels if network coding is used, and the radio ranges are chosen optimally. The reason network coding helps greatly here is that the randomly mixed packets can then find their way towards the destination without the need for explicitly informing nodes where their destinations are. This is especially useful since explicitly identifying routes is difficult when the graph connectivity is unknown.

In this section we have examined some of the areas where network coding can be applied in wireless networks and can broadly classify its benefits as resulting in improvement in a network's throughput, efficiency and scalability [Rout13]. Further benefits, which are beyond the scope of this paper to discuss, include improving resilience to attacks and eavesdropping as a side effect of the encoding schemes used.

Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) refer to networks of spatially dispersed and dedicated sensors that monitor and record the physical conditions of the environment and forward the collected data to a central location. WSNs can measure environmental conditions such as temperature, sound, pollution levels, humidity and wind.[1]

These are similar to wireless ad hoc networks in the sense that they rely on wireless connectivity and spontaneous formation of networks so that sensor data can be transported wirelessly. WSNs monitor physical conditions, such as temperature, sound, and pressure. Modern networks are bi-directional, both collecting data[2] and enabling control of sensor activity.[3] The development of these networks was motivated by military applications such as battlefield surveillance.[4] Such networks are used in industrial and consumer applications, such as industrial process monitoring and control and machine health monitoring.

A WSN is built of "nodes" – from a few to hundreds or thousands, where each node is connected to other sensors. Each such node typically has several parts: a radio transceiver with an internal antenna or connection to an external antenna, a microcontroller, an electronic circuit for interfacing with the sensors and an energy source, usually a battery or an embedded form of energy harvesting. A sensor node might vary in size from a shoebox to (theoretically) a grain of dust, although microscopic dimensions have yet to be realized. Sensor node cost is similarly variable, ranging from a few to hundreds of dollars, depending on node sophistication. Size and cost constraints constrain resources such as energy, memory, computational speed and communications bandwidth. The topology of a WSN can vary from a simple star network to an advanced multi-hop wireless mesh network. Propagation can employ routing or flooding.[5][6]

In computer science and telecommunications, wireless sensor networks are an active research area supporting many workshops and conferences, including International Workshop on Embedded Networked Sensors (EmNetS), IPSN, SenSys, MobiCom and EWSN. As of 2010, wireless sensor networks had deployed approximately 120 million remote units worldwide

In this module the graph with the nodes and edges is developed and will give unique ID to each Node. Each node will sense some data and then using connecting edges will send that data to base station via actuator node.

